---
layout: post
title:  "Vagrant Provisioning with Salt"
date:   2015-04-04 10:00:00
categories: vagrant
comments: true
---

This post is a follow-up to the [Vagrant]({% post_url 2015-03-21-configuration-management %}) where I talked about setting up Vagrant with MySQL. I followed up that post talking about [provisioning with Puppet]({% post_url 2015-03-28-puppet %}).

In this post, I'll talk about using the [Salt provisioner](https://docs.vagrantup.com/v2/provisioning/salt.html). [Salt](http://saltstack.com/) has a similar purpose to Puppet, but takes a different approach with its language.

Salt, like Puppet, has a client-server architecture. In Vagrant, however, Salt runs in a "masterless" mode, using a Salt "minion" without the need for the master instance.

There is no need to install Salt on your local machine to use it with Vagrant. I think that's really nice for portability. And it makes it easy to get started with Salt.

The `Vagrantfile` for Salt has slightly more information than its Puppet equivalent:

```
Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
  config.vm.box = "ubuntu/trusty64"
  config.vm.network "forwarded_port", guest: 3306, host: 3306
  config.vm.synced_folder "salt/roots/", "/srv/salt/"

  config.vm.provision "salt" do |salt|
    salt.minion_config = "salt/minion"
    salt.run_highstate = true
  end
end
```

Again, the forwarded port is for MySQL. There is a synced folder (which is in addition to the Vagrant default of syncing the current working directory to `/vagrant`). This provides Salt a well known location to the Salt State files (`*.sls`). Then we specify the `"salt"` provisioner. The `salt.minion_config` configuration tells the Salt where to find our `minion` configuration file. The `salt.run_highstate` configuration tells Salt ... well, I actually don't understand it.

The Vagrant base directory looks like this:

```
->ls -l
total 8
-rw-r--r--@ 1 Kevin  staff  306 Apr  3 09:00 Vagrantfile
drwxr-xr-x  4 Kevin  staff  136 Mar 14 18:30 salt
```

The `salt` directory is what we referred to above. It contains the `minion` file and looks like this:

```
>ls -l
total 8
-rw-r--r--@ 1 Kevin  staff  159 Mar 14 18:30 minion
drwxr-xr-x  5 Kevin  staff  170 Apr  3 08:39 roots
```

The `minion` file contains some basic configuration properties:

```
master: localhost
file_client: local
mysql.port: 3306
mysql.user: 'root'
mysql.pass: 'root'
mysql.db: 'mysql'
mysql.unix_socket: '/var/run/mysqld/mysqld.sock'
```

See the [Salt documentation](http://docs.saltstack.com/en/latest/ref/modules/all/salt.modules.mysql.html#module-salt.modules.mysql) for more information on these values.

Inside the `salt` directory we have:

```>ls -l
total 16
drwxr-xr-x  5 Kevin  staff   170 Mar 12 20:21 files
-rw-r--r--@ 1 Kevin  staff  1032 Apr  3 09:53 mysql.sls
-rw-r--r--@ 1 Kevin  staff    25 Mar 13 08:43 top.sls
```

The `top.sls` file is the top-level configuration file for Salt, which creates the base "state tree". The `sls` extention refers to a "salt state". Salt is based on target states. The states are declared and it's Salt's job to move things to that state. More on that in a bit. In this case, the `top.sls` file just defers to the `mysql.sls` file by referencing the file without its extension:

```
base:
  '*':
    - mysql
```

You may have guessed that the `sls` files are based on YAML. I find YAML much easier to read and write for configuration than, say, Puppet's DSL. I think that's just because there's less syntax noise.

The `mysql.sls` is where the action is. Here's the entire file:

```
mysql-server:
  pkg.installed

mysql-client:
  pkg.installed

mysql:
  service:
    - running
  require:
    - pkg: mysql-server
  watch:
    - file: /etc/mysql/my.cnf

python-mysqldb:
  pkg.installed

set_localhost_root_password:
  mysql_user.present:
    - name: root
    - host: localhost
    - password: root
    - connection_pass: ""
  require:
    - service: mysql
    - pkg: python-mysqldb

dynamic:
  mysql_database.present:
    - name: dynamic
  mysql_grants.present:
    - grant: all privileges
    - database: dynamic.*
    - user: root
    - host: '%'
  require:
    - service: mysql
    - pkg: python-mysqldb

/etc/mysql/my.cnf:
  file.managed:
    - source:
      - salt://files/my.cnf
  require:
    - service: mysql
    - pkg: python-mysqldb
    - mysql_database: dynamic

/tmp/dynamic.sql:
  file.managed:
    - source:
      - salt://files/dynamic.sql
    - mode: 644

dynamic-sql:
  cmd.run:
    - name: mysql -uroot -proot < /tmp/dynamic.sql
  require:
    - mysql_database: dynamic
    - file: /tmp/dynamic.sql
```

The first couple of items tell Salt to install MySQL packages:

```
mysql-server:
  pkg.installed

mysql-client:
  pkg.installed
```

Both `mysql-server` and `mysql-client` are packages known to Salt. `pkg` is a Salt state. Specifying `pkg.installed` tells Salt that the target state for each package is that it be installed. This is a nice feature of Salt and Puppet both: you don't have to specify a particular package manager (or at least you don't on Ubuntu): you just tell the system you want the packgae installed and it figures that out.

Not all "states" are packages. The first part of a state declaration is it's ID and in the previous case also referred to the name of a package. In the case of `dynamic`, the name is arbitrary, while in `/etc/mysql/my.cnf` it refers to a file:

```
/etc/mysql/my.cnf:
  file.managed:
    - source:
      - salt://files/my.cnf
  require:
    - service: mysql
    - pkg: python-mysqldb
    - mysql_database: dynamic

/tmp/dynamic.sql:
  file.managed:
    - source:
      - salt://files/dynamic.sql
    - mode: 644
```

Similar to Puppet, Salt states may be achieved by Salt working in parallel, so some dependency management is required in the configuration. Note the `require` property in the `mysql` state. This tells Salt that this state has a prerequisite of the `mysql-server` package.

```
mysql:
  service:
    - running
  require:
    - pkg: mysql-server
  watch:
    - file: /etc/mysql/my.cnf
```

As in the [Puppet example]({% post_url 2015-03-28-puppet %}) we have the `files` directory:

```
>ls -l
total 32
-rw-r--r--@ 1 Kevin  staff   695 Mar 12 20:21 dynamic.sql
-rw-r--r--  1 Kevin  staff  4156 Mar 10 21:30 my.cnf
-rw-r--r--@ 1 Kevin  staff   222 Mar 11 09:18 permissions.sh
```

Finally, here are startup times for provisioning the Vagrant instance with Salt. Refer to the previous posts on the [shell]({% post_url 2015-03-21-configuration-management %}) and [Puppet]({% post_url 2015-03-28-puppet %}) provisioners to compare them. The first time up, this is what it takes on my Mac:

```
real  3m22.341s
user  0m4.312s
sys 0m1.850s
```

That is quite a bit longer that Puppet or the shell. Note, however, that I installed Puppet on my Mac before using it. Salt installation is only on the target VM, so it's doing extra work every time.

After a `vagrant halt`, the next `vagrant up` took:

```
real  0m21.512s
user  0m3.325s
sys 0m1.341s
```

That's about the same as using the shell provisioner and Puppet, so it's really only the initial provisioning that's slower.

## Summary

I struggled with Salt much more than with Puppet. In fact I never solved one key issue: after the first startup of Vagrant, I'm not able to connect to MySQL, even though the daemon is running. I have to halt and re-up Vagrant for everything to be ready to go. I also don't understand why I needed to create a separate state for the root password (`set_localhost_root_password` above). Not understanding these issues is a bit frustrating.

I found the Salt language a bit easier than the Puppet equivalent, but I have no doubt that's a personal preference. In fact, I liked the Salt language better that all the rest due to it's simplicity and relative consistancy.

The [Salt documentation](http://docs.saltstack.com/en/latest/) is mostly good, but I found it a bit frustrating to find an explanation for some core concepts. For example, the term "highstate" is used everywhere without a basic explanation or reference in the docs. I finally found the definition in [the glossary](http://docs.saltstack.com/en/latest/glossary.html), but this seems like a fundamental problem to fully understanding the system. I also didn't find quite as many examples as with Puppet, but that might change over time.

I wanted to like Salt for several reasons, but the issues I encountered were frustrating enough to make me favor Puppet over Salt.
