---
layout: post
title:  "Vagrant Provisioning with Chef"
date:   2015-04-14 11:00:00
categories: vagrant
comments: true
---

This post is a follow-up to the [Vagrant]({% post_url 2015-03-21-configuration-management %}) post where I talked about setting up Vagrant with MySQL. I followed up that post talking about provisioning with [Puppet]({% post_url 2015-03-28-puppet %}), [Salt]({% post_url 2015-04-04-salt %}) and [Ansible]({% post_url 2015-04-12-ansible %}).

In this post, I'll talk about using the [Chef Solo provisioner](http://docs.vagrantup.com/v2/provisioning/chef_solo.html). Vagrant actually has several provisioners available for Chef. After some investigation, I chose Chef Solo, even though it appears that Chef Zero has replaced it. Chef Solo seemed simpler and there were more examples.

Chef is more like Puppet than Ansible or Salt in that it uses a Ruby-based DSL. I think it's more Ruby than Ruby-based, so it might be the most programmer-oriented DSL.

I'll state right from the start that using Chef was painful to use. Compared to the other tools, it comes off as far more primitive for my use case. This might have to do with my choice of Chef Solo, but it doesn't sound like [Chef Zero](https://www.chef.io/blog/2014/06/24/from-solo-to-zero-migrating-to-chef-client-local-mode/) chef addresses any of the issues I had.

In order to use Chef, you need to:

1. Install the Chef DK:
  * I also needed to ensure I was using Chef's implementation of Ruby, since the one on my Mac was not compatible
  * In the end, I created an `env.sh` file that I sourced in my shell to setup my environment
2. Install a plugin:
  * `vagrant plugin install vagrant-omnibus`
3. Create a `Berksfile` that allows Chef to specify and download dependencies

I also had to do some unexpected dependency management in the Chef recipe. Chef requires the `mysql2` ruby gem in order to connect to MySQL. I expected things like this to be part of the built-in MySQL support.

In the end, it appears a [defect in Chef](https://github.com/opscode-cookbooks/database/issues/128) kept me from completing the provisioning. It might just as well be that I'm doing something wrong. If I hadn't found that issue, I would strongly suspect that it was just a problem with my configuration.

In case someone can tell me how to fix it, here is the Vagrantfile I used:

```
Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
  config.vm.box = "ubuntu/trusty64"
  config.vm.network "forwarded_port", guest: 3306, host: 3306

  if Vagrant.has_plugin?("vagrant-omnibus")
    config.omnibus.chef_version = 'latest'
  end

  config.vm.provision :chef_solo do |chef|
    chef.json = {
      mysql: {
        server_root_password: 'root',
        server_debian_password: 'root',
        server_repl_password: 'root'
      }
    }

    chef.run_list = [
      'recipe[vagrant-mysql::default]'
    ]
  end
end
```

The `Berksfile`:

```
source "https://supermarket.chef.io"

metadata
```

The `metadata.rb`:

```
name 'vagrant-mysql'
depends 'mysql', '~> 6.0'
depends 'database', '~> 4.0.3'
depends 'mysql2_chef_gem', '~> 1.0'
```

And finally, the `recipe/default.rb`:

```
mysql_service 'default' do
  port '3306'
  version '5.5'
  initial_root_password 'root'
  bind_address '0.0.0.0'
  action [:create, :start]
end

mysql_client 'default' do
  action :create
end

connection_parameters = {
  :host => '127.0.0.1',
  :username => 'root',
  :password => 'root'
}

mysql2_chef_gem 'default' do
  action :install
end

mysql_database 'default' do
  connection connection_parameters
  sql { ::File.open('/vagrant/files/dynamic.sql').read }
  action :query
end
```

## Summary

There are always tradeoffs in software and all software has defects. Chef may in fact be the best of these tools at certain tasks or in terms of flexibility, speed, etc. From my use case, I just don't know. But for provisioning Vagrant, I don't think Chef is the best way to go unless you already know it or have an organizational investment in it. The other tools are easier to use, appear to me to be more advanced from a user perspective, and, in the end, actually work.
